# Connecting JS files to HTML

at the bottom of your html file, underneath the closing body tag, put a `<script></script>` tag. You can either enter in your JS in that script tag, or you can connect an external sheet.

In the opening tag, type `src=""` and the name of the js file.

# DOM Manipulation

-   DOM stands for 'Document Object Model'.

You can think of your browser like a bowl. Everything that exists on your index.html file exists in the bowl and appears on the browser. We can add things to our html file and those things are added to the bowl.

But what if we wanted to add things to the bowl using Javascript, to make things more dynamic? That's where DOM manipulation comes in!

There are three main steps for DOM manipulation:

# Step 1: Grabbing/Creating an HTML element

### Grabbing

If the HTML element we want to change in Javascript is <strong>already on</strong> our HTML file, we need to grab it and bring it to our Javascript file. For example, let's say there's an h1 on my HTML file.

    // html file
    <div>
        <h1>Hello!</h1>
    </div>

I want to bring this h1 over into my Javascript file so I can manipulate it. To do that, I need to first give that h1 an `id`.

    // html file
    <div>
        <h1 id="helloHeader">Hello!</h1>
    </div>

Now in my Javascript file, I can grab that element by using the `id`, like this:

    // JS file
    const helloHeader = document.getElementById("helloHeader")

Here, we are creating a new variable called `helloHeader` and setting it equal to the h1 element that already exists on the document with the id of `helloHeader`. It is good practice to name the variable the same as what the id is, which is why they are both `helloHeader` in this case.

\*\*\* `document.getElementById()` is not the only way to grab an element! Another useful one is `document.querySelector()`. `querySelector` works similarly to `getElementById`, but you can type in an id or a class to grab an element. However, because you can do an id or a class, you have to specify using `#` for `ids` and `.` for classes. For example, if I were to use `document.querySelector` to grab the helloHeader instead of `document.getElementById`, it'd look like this:

    const helloHeader = document.querySelector("#helloHeader")

Using either `document.getElementById()` or `document.querySelector()`, we've successfully grabbed our h1 element from the html file and brought it into the Javascript file! We'll edit it on step 2, but what if you want to create an HTML element instead of using one that already exists?

### Creating

Right now, our html file just has a `div` and an `h1` element. But what if I want to add a `p` tag below the `h1` that has my name? Let's do it with DOM manipulation.

Instead of grabbing an element by an Id like we did above, I can create a `p` tag like this:

    // JS file
    const helloHeader = document.getElementById("helloHeader")

    const introParagraph = document.createElement("p")

That's it! We've successfully created a new `p` tag. Let's edit it in the next step so it actually contains something.

# Step 2: Modifying

In Step 1 we grabbed the `h1` tag on the html file and created a `p` tag. Now let's modify them. Instead of 'Hello!', I want the `h1` to say 'Howdy', and I want the `p` tag to have my name. We can do both of these things using `.innerHTML`.

To use `.innerHTML`, we simply write the name of our variable, add `.innerHTML` to it, then set it equal to what we want it to say. Like this:

    // JS file
    helloHeader.innerHTML = "Howdy"
    introParagraph.innerHTML = "Jaye"

And that's it! We should see the `helloHeader` update to say "Howdy" instead of "Hello!". However, we still can't see the `introParagraph` at all. That's because we need to do Step 3.

# Step 3: Appending

Since we created the `introParagraph` using DOM manipulation, we need to add it to the bowl. We need to give it to the browser to display. To do that, we use `.append()`. Because the `helloHeader` element already exists on the html file, we don't need to append it. That's why we can see the changes already.

The syntax of an append statement is this:

    ElementYou'reAppendingTo.append(elementYou'reAppending)

Let's append our `introParagraph` to the `div` that already exists on the HTML file. To do that, we need to first give it an `id`...

    // HTML file
    <div id="container">
        <h1 id="helloHeader">Hello!</h1>
    </div>

... and then grab it in our Javascript file...

    // JS file
    const container = document.getElementById("container")

And now we can append!

    // JS file
    container.append(introParagraph)

The introParagraph should now be visible on your browser!

# Summary

It may seem like a lot, but all of DOM manipulation is basically those three steps -- 1. grab/create, 2. modify, 3. append. As long as you remember that, you'll be a master of DOM manipulation in no time!
